JUDY WOODRUFF: More than five
million Americans are admitted
into hospital intensive care
units, or ICUs, each year.
Undoubtedly, they are a crucial
component of the health care
system for treating seriously
ill patients and
preventing deaths.
But some patients also
eventually leave the ICU with
new complications and problems.
Special correspondent Jackie
Judd looks at those concerns
and an effort to make sure
patients are getting
the right interventions.
WOMAN: Well, as soon as we get
this ultrasound done, we are
going to get your lights on and
your windows open, OK?
JACKIE JUDD: Every year, almost
six million patients land in
an intensive care unit, and,
through often heroic
efforts, lives are saved.
For many of those survivors,
that period of time becomes
a bright line in their lives
of before and after.
PAUL TURPIN, Was Admitted to
ICU: I am very aware that I am
not the same person who went
into the hospital with sepsis.
I am just not.
JACKIE JUDD: In what ways?
PAUL TURPIN: Well,
my personality.
I'm shorter-tempered, mood
change, mild depression.
JACKIE JUDD: Paul Turpin,
an endocrinologist
who lives outside of
Nashville with his wife,
Mary Lou, spent a
month in an ICU.
That was two-and-a-half
years ago.
Richard Langford's first ICU
stay was a decade ago, and he
has not lived on his own since.
RICHARD LANGFORD, Was
Admitted to ICU: Mom is the
one who takes care of me.
Now, my mother is 88 years old.
JACKIE JUDD: Psychologist Jim
Jackson leads this support
group, and is part of a team
at Vanderbilt University Medical
Center that helped identify
a constellation of symptoms
mimicking PTSD, post-traumatic
stress disorder.
They call it post-intensive
care syndrome, or PICS.
JIM JACKSON, Vanderbilt
University Medical
Center: They don't have
a traumatic experience
in the way that a combat veteran
or a rape survivor would,
so they're not referred to
a mental health professional.
They really fall
through the cracks.
With all of these gaps, there
just is a lack of awareness.
How do you feel?
JACKIE JUDD: Dr. Wes Ely
has studied this phenomenon
for almost 20 years.
He says the risk factors are
clear: powerful sedatives and
prolonged use of ventilators,
which can trigger delirium.
Some ICU patients need
those interventions,
but not all of them do.
DR.
WES ELY, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center: We had to tie
people down, so they wouldn't
pull lines and tubes out, but
we also chemically restrained
them with these deep sedatives.
So we got comfortable pummeling
people's brains with gargantuan
amounts of benzodiazepines,
propofol, and other
types of sedation.
We put them in this cocoon,
but it wasn't a safe one.
And when we started measuring
delirium, and then started
measuring physical immobility,
it unveiled this issue of PICS.
WOMAN: Hi, sweetie.
Can you open your eyes?
JACKIE JUDD: A substantial
number of patients leave the ICU
with newly-acquired problems,
ranging from dementia,
to depression, to muscle
and nerve disease.
Dr. Ely has been following
some of them for six years,
and will soon release a study.
Preliminary data show one-third
of patients improve and get
back to normal cognitive and
functioning levels.
One-third remain the same as
the day they left the hospital.
And one-third
decline even further.
WOMAN: We should talk about
whether we should move the tube
to the neck, OK, because that
will allow us to
decrease the amount of
sedation that you're on.
JACKIE JUDD: So, leaders
in acute care developed a
different ICU treatment.
When possible, they keep
patients out of the cocoon
by reducing the use of
drugs and ventilators,
and by getting patients moving.
WES ELY: Turning off of sedation
every day and turning off
the ventilator every day gets
people out of the hospital
sooner, it decreases
cost of care and it
helps improve survival.
JACKIE JUDD: Hospitals across
the country have been slow
to adopt the practices in use
here at Vanderbilt.
It's been more than four
years since the Society
of Critical Care Medicine
issued new treatment
guidelines for controlling pain
and delirium in the ICU, and,
yet today, the organization
describes compliance
as mediocre.
MAN: We're going to
get you every day up
as much as we can, OK?
JACKIE JUDD: Coaxing patients
out of bed to exercise takes
a lot more staff time than
sedating them.
And getting doctors to change
what has long been done is hard.
WES ELY: A lot of it has
to do with people in long
white coats, the doctors.
The doctors are used
to how they do things.
They don't want to be told
to do it a different way,
and they're late adopters.
We have early adopters in life,
and we have late adopters,
and the doctors think, well,
this is an invisible problem.
I don't see it.
I don't see it as
an issue anyway.
They can't even necessarily
envision what it is that
could happen so much better.
JACKIE JUDD: Vanderbilt used
to release patients from
the ICU with no follow-up.
Now it is one of a handful of
hospitals with post-ICU clinics.
It's a way station
for patients at risk.
The goal is to be a bridge to
a medical world with little
awareness of the syndrome.
Dr. Carla Sevin is
one of the founders.
DR.
CARLA SEVIN, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center: The
main purpose of the clinic is
to sort of bridge this
million-dollar intensive
care time to this
outpatient status, which
is not set up to take care of
the multipronged problems that
people experience after the
ICU.
RICHARD LANGFORD: That
might be permanent.
JACKIE JUDD: The clinic also
organizes the support group
where Richard Langford is a
regular.
RICHARD LANGFORD: It helps
give me a structure for why I'm
feeling the way I do, and that
I'm not going crazy.
This anxiety, it is -- is not
something that will kill me.
It's not something that
I have to worry about,
and keep worrying about
worrying about worrying.
PAUL TURPIN: Thank you,
lord, for this nice day.
JACKIE JUDD: As for Paul Turpin,
he is happily back practicing
medicine, and still managing
emotional ups and downs,
including a lingering
sense of terror, which
is common among ICU
patients.
PAUL TURPIN: Fear of
ever being in an ICU.
JACKIE JUDD: What is
that fear rooted in?
PAUL TURPIN: Being back in
those circumstances, being out
of control, being wrapped up in
that cocoon.
JACKIE JUDD: Is it what
you fear the most in
your life at the moment?
PAUL TURPIN: Probably.
WES ELY: You know, you're
an inspiration to us.
JACKIE JUDD: Dr. Ely, who
travels worldwide to spread the
word about PICS, says he senses
a momentum to shift ICU
care in order to reduce
the harm it can cause.
WES ELY: People were built to
be vertical and moving around,
not lying in a bed 24/7.
So we're trying to get back to
the humanness of critical care.
JACKIE JUDD: Even so, he
predicts it will be at least
five years before what happens
in this ICU becomes the norm for
patients being treated at the
most vulnerable and frightening
time of their lives.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Jackie Judd in
Nashville, Tennessee.